---
title: Working Women in the 2000s
tags: TeXt
---

Some of the Bollywood movies from 2000 to 2002 were very similar to the 90s romance movies. Movies like Kabhi Khushi Kabhi Gham (2001) kept the DDJL-type focus on tradition, or parampara, and also displayed the main female lead as a housewife with the patriarch making all familial decisions. 

Other 2000s movies, however, were very different from what we were used to seeing in the 80s and 90s. Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna (2006) was one such movie. Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna brought a new focus to adulterous relationships, something that, till then, wasn’t explored much in bollywood movies. Not only that, but it showed the two families going through divorces and the protagonists getting remarried to the person they truly loved. The movie shed a positive light on divorce, something that is still not that common in Bollywood movies, and put an equal role and responsibility on both members in the adulterous relationship rather than focusing the blame on one member. 

Not only that, but the movie also showed one of the female protagonists having an extremely successful career and being the breadwinner for her family. There is no overruling patriarch in the movie and the women in the movie seem to have almost as important a role as the men. This was a common theme throughout later 2000s Bollywood movies. The movies began to stray away from having the all-encompassing, very close families that were displayed in the 90s and began showing children moving out of the house, many times overseas, taking away from the importance of having a powerful patriarch figure. The women were typically given careers and aspirations and were even sometimes shown as being workaholics. While many of the movies still didn’t show men in the kitchen or taking care of the household, it was still a big jump in the correct direction with more and more of the movies giving the woman a more substantial character and giving back some of the power to women.    


<!--more-->
