---
title: Gender representation in the fiery 1970s 
tags: TeXt
---

The 1970’s was the era of Bollywood that gave rise to its greatest star ever, Amitabh Bacchan. Bachhan burst onto the Bollywood scene with *'Sholay'* (1975), which is arguably the most popular bollywood movie ever made, and sparked Bacchan’s portrayal of the ‘angry young man’ which eventually spearheaded the genesis theme of Indian Cinema.
  
While Sholay defined this era of Indian Cinema, it did not accurately represent the movement of gender equality in India at the time. Films such as *‘Ankur’* and *‘Bhumika’* were much more influential in representing women in society and their empowerment. These films depicted women in a light different from that of a traditional housewife, and both of them belonged to a genre of Indian cinema known as ‘Parallel Cinema’.
  
The genre of ‘Parallel Cinema originated in West Bengal in the 1950s and became prominent from the ‘60s to the late ‘70s. These films sought to shed light on the actual day to day problems of Indian society and were not at all mainstream in nature. Films of the parallel cinema were of a low budget and made
  
The film *‘Ankur’* revolves around the life of a woman named Lakshmi and a young man named Surya. Lakshmi is married to a mute and deaf man who is also an alcoholic, so it is up to Lakshmi to perform her duty of managing the household and providing for her family financially. Additionally, Surya was forced into a child marriage by his father and is frustated with the way his life has turned out after graduating from school.

*‘Ankur’* is based on a real life story and it goes to show the role that parallel cinema played in creating awareness for the problems that people all over the country every single day of their lives. The parallel cinema showed the struggle of the Indian population as they suffered under a patriarchal system wherein the oldest male is the head of the household and makes all the decisions for his spouse, children, and grandchildren unanimously.

Other films that were made as a part of the Indian parallel cinema and sought to raise awareness about the suffering that women of the time encountered owing to pressure from their own families were *Bhumika (1977)*, *Maya Darpan (1972)*, and *Garam Hawa (1974)* among many others.

The parallel cinema was no match for the mainstream bollywood films of the '70s, but it did play a significant role in shining a light on the struggle and strife that women and non-patriarchs faced during the '70s in India
