---
title: New Indian Woman in 1980s Bollywood
tags: 1980s
author: Soham
---

The 1970s era was a true inflection point for gender representation in Indian Cinema. Although there was still an enormous amount of progress to be made, the ball of gender equality in cinema had started rolling. What began in the 1970s as "parallel cinema", was taken in the 1980s in a different direction with the rise of action based melodrama that quickly took over commercial cinema (*Mehta*: 107). 

This new genre was so well adopted among the public that it had more audience than parallel cinema of the 70s and the rest of the industry combined. We can see how movies still had a strong lead male presence; Of the top 10 highest grossing movies, eight were of the action genre with five of them featuring Bachchan (*Mehta*: 107). This was not just in the north. In the south, Rajinikanth took on a similar role as the "angry young man" and rose to become one of the highest income actors (*Mehta*: 138). The action genres had a female presence, but it was oftentimes rooted in conservative narratives. This meant that the women in these films were mostly portrayed as being dependent on the lead men.

Let's take a deeper look at what the role of the female supporting characters embodied in the action driven cinema. The conservative, rural depiction of women from the 1940s to 1970s was no longer sustainable as the industry was shifting towards a more modern view of Indian culture. Towards this end, the 1980s Bollywood industry tried to redefine the role of women by creating the template persona of a "new Indian Woman", someone who was a blend of modern characteristics but with the ability to access more traditional aspects of Indian culture. This persona strived to remove any caste and religion markers from the character. Usually the character had an “innocence” as a result of her upper-middle class background, and although she was publicly visible in the films, the character’s main role seemed to be to “visibly fall in love” (*Mehta*: 153). This templatization of the lead female characters meant that the importance of women in Indian cinema continued to diminish, a trend that started in the 1950s and continued for the years after. Even after the genesis of this “new Indian Woman”, the female lead role had become nothing more than a blemish. This is the singular reason why we see a lot of B-list actresses starring in the role of Bacchan’s female partner in his action movies from this period (*Mehta*: 154).

Overall, this meant that the role of Indian women in cinema was still not much better than what was seen before in the 1970s, despite the strong feminist movement that was rising in the country. Perhaps it was that the cinema industry was slow in recognizing the changing gender roles and beliefs in the country, or it simply wanted to cater to its more conservative audience. Despite all this, we can still see the explicit change in the female lead characters from the 1980s from their earlier counterparts. This was just the beginning of the changes Indian cinema would take to reimagine gender roles in the industry.

### Works Cited

1. *Mehta, Rini*. Unruly Cinema: History, Politics, and Bollywood. University of Illinois Press, 2020.


<!--more-->