---
title: Gender equality in 1990s
tags: TeXt
---

The 90s were heavily characterized by family movies such as Sooraj Barjayta’s Hum Apke Hain Koun, Hum Saath Saath Hai, etc as well as cliche, romantic movies such as Dilwaale Dulhania Le Jayenge, Kuch Kuch Hota Hai, Ashiqui, etc. Family movies had a tendency to reinforce many of the already existent gender roles as they liked to present a "perfect" family, so in the movies, typically, the female lead was presented simply as a love interest or motherly figure and would spend her day cooking and cleaning while the male leads would have prodictive work days. The more romantic movies, hoever, more often called out and challenged some of the gender roles. While some of their attempts were slightly lacking, they were still existent.

One example of a classic family-movie is Hum Apke Hain Koun (1994) which was about two orphaned boys, Prem and Rajesh, who were raised by their uncle. As Rajesh gained success in his career, it was decided that it was time he get married and settle down. They then meet Pooja and Nisha. Pooja, the elder sister, connects with Rajesh on their love for painting and end up getting married. Meanwhile, Prem and Nisha get closer and banter back and forth until they eventually fall in love with each other. Rajesh and Pooja then get pregnant and Pooja gives birth but not long later, falls down the stairs to her untimely death. After this, there is a loss felt throughout the family as Pooja served as a motherly or sisterly figure for most people in her life. It is then decided that Nisha should marry Rajesh and take a motherly role in the baby’s life. After a series of events, however, it is discovered that her and Prem are in love and the two of them end up getting married. 

In the movie, Prem, played by Salman Khan, was shown as a young, up-and-coming businessman with his own set of career dreams and aspirations and a love for music which play an important role in the movie. Nisha (played by Madhuri Dixit), however, was only really shown to be falling in love with prem, her goals, aspirations, and hobbies never really showed. Similarly, Prem’s older brother, Rajesh, was also displayed as a hard-working, intelligent businessman with a love for art and painting. Pooja, however, was displayed as a caring and joyous figure, but besides that, was purely displayed as a caretaker as is typical of movies from this decade. As can be seen, in Hum Apke Hain Koun, the male characters are very 3D with goals and hobbies whereas the female characters are very flat, their personalities are never really exposed past being good homemakers and wives. 

In Dilwaale Dulhania Le Jayenge, however, gender roles were actually challenged. Simran, played by Kajol, is shown to be a very obedient and “sanskari” girl living in London. When Simran was just born, her father had made a vow with his best friend that she would marry his son. At the beginning of the movie, it is decided that it has come time for them to get married, so Simran asks for permission to travel Europe with her friends as one last display of freedom. On the trip, they meet Raj (played by Shah Rukh Khan) and his friends and venture through Europe. Along the way, without realizing it, Raj and Simran fall in love with each other. Simran’s dad hears Simran telling her mom about Raj and gets angry and forces the family to move back to India and get Simran married immediately. Raj follows them to Punjab and him and Simran act as if they are complete strangers and Raj tries to win over the love of all her family members before it’s too late. 

When Simran’s mom finds out about who Raj is, she encourages them to run away together, stating that she told herself that her daughters would be able to live their lives to the fullest and seek whatever happiness they wanted and that she didn’t want Simran to be held back from finding love and happiness just because she’s a woman. However, they refuse to do so and instead continue to try and win her father over. When Raj’s identity is revealed to everyone, Simran’s dad is furious. Raj then says “Yeh lijiye aapki amanat” which literally means “take your precious belonging” while giving her hand to her father and leaves the house to go to the train station and leave. This line displayed the tendency for men to treat daughters, wives,a and even sisters as belongings and property as opposed to humans with a head and heart. The movie ends with the famous line “Ja Simran, jee lai apni zindagi” which means “Go Simran, live your life” as Simran leaves with Raj. This movie calls out double standards between genders through the multiple short monologues her mom makes as well as the tendency to show ownership towards women.


<!--more-->
