---
title: Gender Equality in Pre-1970s Bollywood
tags: TeXt
---

It is well known all over the world that historically, India has a patriarchal society wherein men are seen to be the breadwinners of the house and their main focus should be on earning enough money to support their families, while women were seen to be housewives and homemakers who had to focus on menial household chores and were not meant to work for themselves. This structure of Indian society has most definitely evolved over the years, and was mostly prevalent in the rural parts of India rather than the main cities.

Indian cinema has moved along with the times and we can notice the progression of the portrayal of women in Indian cinema starting from the period before the '70s, all the way to the present day.

In this section, we will start by discussing how the film *‘Shree 420’* (1955)  portrayed two different types of women in society, and how the director, Raj Kapoor, chose to depict them to his audience.

Starting off with *‘Shree 420’*, the two female leads of the film are Vidya (protagonist) and Maya, who both have their own influence on Raj, the male protagonist. Vidya is a schoolteacher who has very clear morals and will not bend the rules, while Maya is depicted as an illusion, who incites Raj to sacrifice his morals in order to earn money. While the two women represent different parts of society, we can see that neither of them are in control of what is going on around them.

Vidya can only hope that Raj will do the right thing and help the poor people of Bombay who have been tricked into believing that Sonachand will give them a home for 100 Rupees, while Maya used her looks and feminine charm to entice Raj into becoming a conman and work for Sonachand. Vidya, although she is virtuous, cannot control Raj’s actions and cannot help the people in any way. Maya, on the other side of the scale, has to make do with her charm because she is in a way following orders from Sonachand. Hence, in the defining movie that kickstarted bollywood, we can see a huge imbalance of power between males and female.

Moving forward to 1966, India has created history by appointing Indira Gandhi to be the third Prime Minister of India, and the first and only female Prime Minister of India to this day. This appointment of Indira gandhi sparked the movement for gender equality in India, since it was the first time a woman held a conventionally patriarchal role in the country.

Since Indian cinema is a reflection of society in the era that it is in, we can infer that this was the turning point for women in Indian cinema and paved the way for gender equality to make its representation in Indian Cinema.

<!--more-->