---
title: Gender equality in 2010s
tags: TeXt
---

The 2010s witnessed a rise in “masala” films and coming-of-age films, such as Happy New Year (2013) and Secret Superstar (2014) - movies that typically had large budgets and were commercially successful, with many of these films also featuring actresses that are on the younger side of the age spectrum. However, the 2010s also witnessed a stark increase in female-centric films such as Queen (2013) and Pink (2016) which redefined how gender roles are portrayed. The stories focus solely on the female protagonist and her daily struggles - this character is usually well-educated with the means to live comfortably without the need for a man. She has found her place in modern society and goes against the “traditional” ideals that were expected from women in early Bollywood movies.

The movie Queen is considered one of the most influential feminist films by many scholar. Its story centers around the female protagonist Rani Mehra, who is a conservative, Punjabi woman from Delhi. After being rejected by her fiance for being “too traditional”, she embarks on a solo trip to Paris and Amsterdam. Over the course of her trip, she moves away from her conservative upbringing as she learns more about herself and the friends she makes from different upbringings. When her fiance finally decides that he does in fact want to marry Rani, she now knows her self-worth and rejects him, having come to gain more confidence in herself as a result of her journey and happily embraces the freedom that comes with it. Queen was successful in moving away from gender stereotypes that have been common throughout Bollywood - there is no “strong man” coming to save the “meek woman”, instead, Rani is fully capable of fighting back against muggers on the street. Even besides the protagonist, secondary female characters are also painted as strong women - for instance, a friend Rani makes in Paris is a single mother who is still free-willed and “happy go-lucky” as she enjoys partying and the night life the city has to offer. Not once are they painted in a negative light, and even after losing a lot of her conservative tendencies, Rani is still someone who is in touch with her roots and culture, thus successful in capturing the true essence of the “Indian woman” in modern society.

Following the success of Queen there came a new era of Indian girls finding confidence in themselves and fighting back against what used to be considered “normal” in a misogynistic society. It inspired numerous movies such as Neerja (2016) and Pink, featuring female protagonists who struggle against gender norms and oppression, and ultimately come out victorious. This was also during a time when society was rapidly embracing the #MeToo movement across the globe, calling for women empowerment. Even films such as Dangal (2016) emphasize the fight against gender inequality and to promote equal opportunities for both. The breaking of female stereotypes was a common denominator to many films released during this decade - either outright like Queen or relatively more subtle like Dangal - and this was widely celebrated by the general public, something that would not have been seen a few decades earlier. 

<!--more-->
